# Defining mutually exclusive dimensions relevant to inform states

Tags:
<kbd>$countable</kbd>, <kbd>$sellable</kbd>, <kbd>$sold</kbd>, <kbd>$owned</kbd>

## General Takeaways

Defining mutually exclusive dimensions relevant to inventory accuracy will inform what states to start with. We’ve discussed a handful: `countable`, `sellable`, `sold`, and `owned` - see diagrams at the end. 

Ownership is a quality relevant to accounting but it doesn’t seem to be relevant to inventory accuracy specifically.

We should always consider how various states can flow into each other (see the state machine!), as they unlock potential new business workflows (e.g. Incoming -> QA instead of Available)

There is unlikely to be an initial need for us to let merchants define custom states.
They would have a hard time integrating well into the rest of Shopify.
This doesn’t rule out manual “reasons” within buckets (“why is this set aside?”)

## Open Questions

1. If ownership is relevant for inventory accounting, when in the fulfillment process do merchants “lose ownership” of the item?
2. How would we add/remove state dimensions (sellable/countable/owned)?
3. How would we add/remove states?

## Discussion points

#### What does “owned” mean as a dimension?

Looking at `Keith`’s Diagram v2, there are two regions that are unclear:

	State A: Sold     + On Hand + Not Owned
	State B: Not Sold + On Hand + Not Owned

The common factor being `on hand + not owned`; can you have inventory `on hand` that is `not owned`?

`Keith` suggested that `State A` could be “Unfulfilled consignment sale”; basically, a third party seller that is authorized to sell the goods but does not actually own the goods (the consignor, or owner), gets a percentage of the revenue.

By extension, that can mean `State B` is “Consigned item available for sale”.

`Isinsu`: “Back-ordered may also not be owned if the merchant hasn’t bought it yet.”

`Keith`: “That’s ‘pre-ordered”.

#### Does Owned play a role in Inventory States?

`Kwok`: 
While I think Owned is relevant for inventory accounting, I'm struggling to see how it plays a part in making inventory counts more accurate - the other dimensions/properties we've discussed have a direct impact on accuracy (e.g. whether or not it's on-hand, whether or not a buyer can buy it, these both inform which "bucket" it should fall in).

Owned seems more relevant as a quality of a quantity that determines whether or not it's included in accounting, but not the "role" of the item in question.

`Isinsu`:
There are complexities to accounting I also think that complicates things, eg: incoming is not always owned cause it depends on the FOD agreement between supplier and buyer.

Further discussion led to Estelle’s open question of “During the process of getting fulfilled do merchants still own it?”. This is still unclear.

`Farai`: 
I don’t see ownership being a critical dimension to help define quantities. Worth interrogating the idea tho’.

`Pavi`:
“Similar to what was discussed earlier in the States jam, this seems more helpful for metrics rather than it being a state.

#### Does 3PL (third-party logistics, e.g. dropshipping) play a role in states?

`Isinsu`: “3PL quantities are owned but not on-hand, but we can derive that based on location”

So no, not really. 3PL is a property of the location, and not a dimension for determining state.

#### Transitioning from incoming to QA before Available

`Keith`: 
He mentioned that he previously worked with jewelry where incoming inventory was held in a QA state before it could be further used/processed. Sort of a reverse-broken state.

`Alisha`:
“QAing incoming items is a common occurrence with a few types of inventory; we have it in our list and defined as Items that are in review and cannot be sold and that items enter state manually, items that have been marked for review”

`Karthi`:
Receiving incoming inventory into a QA state is a common returns workflow too. Returned items need to be reviewed to determine if they go back for sale or disposed of.

These are all compelling reasons to ensure the state machine transitions of States should support incoming into states other than available (the only possible option right now).

#### Have we considered letting merchants define their own states?

We’ve considered it but it doesn’t seem to be a good idea, at least not initially.

`Kwok`: 
With regards to inventory accuracy, our goal is simple but difficult: to prevent over/underselling.

If we let merchants arbitrarily decide new buckets that don't specify whether they're countable or sellable for example, then we don't know whether or not they should be included or not in COGS, sell-through rates, etc, and we won't be able to make any informed statements/guidance about the state of a merchant's inventory.

`Jeff` then asks if we have all our bases covered, or do we need to let merchants define their own buckets by specifying the relevant dimensions (e.g. sellable, countable) to integrate well in the workflow.

`Alisha`:
The way we've been thinking of Shopify-defined inventory states is that the states are induced by actions in Shopify.

> If merchants created their own states, it would be harder for us to create rules around what actions cause state changes, and how those changes affect reporting data.

While `Alisha` and `Kwok` agree that we probably don’t have all possible states covered right now, the key ones are being explored and discussed right now. 

`Kwok`:
We know the venn diagram (see diagrams below) won’t be all we need, but ideally by the end of our explorations we'd have enough semantic buckets well defined that there should be very little demand for a merchant to need their own semantic bucket. 

My personal feeling is that we won't end up needing to provide custom states with distinct semantic properties at the end of our explorations.

To conclude, `Alisha` leaves a good point:

> I suppose it’s possible to have a hybrid approach, where we have set states, and merchants can create another to augment + help their specific business need, but I’m not sure how we would be able to report on that/include it in any reporting if we aren’t sure on our end why it was created.
